Microsoft Azure A-Z 900 Certification Notes:

What is Cloud Computing...
    Cloud Computing - a network of remote servers hosted on the Internet to store, manage, and process data. (Rather than a local server or a PC)
        Cloud Providers - you are only responsible for configuring cloud services, and code while someone else takes care of the servers, hiring IT, paying the real-estate.
  
    Dedicated server - one host, one machine, one vpn
        Expensive, high maintenance, high security
    Virtual Private Server - one host, one machine, multiple vpn
    Shared Hosting - multiple host, one machine, multiple vpn
        Cheap, limited
    Cloud Hosting - Multiple hosts, multiple machines, multiple vpn
        Scalable, Secure, Cost-Effective, High Configurability

Common Cloud Services...
    4 most common types of cloud services for Infractructure as a service (IaaS) would be:
        Compute - virtual comp that runs applications, programs and code
        Storage - virtual hard-drive that stores files
        Networking - virtual network that defines internet connections and network isolations
        Databases - virtual database for storing reporting data or a database for general purpose
        
What is Microsoft...
    Microsoft - American computer technology corportation; makes software, phones, tablets, game consoles, cloud services, search engine and more; best known for their Operation System
    Microsoft Azure - the cloud provider service microsoft provides; bright blue color of the cloudless sky 
    CSPs - Cloud Service Providers
    
Benefits of Cloud Computing...
    Cost-effective - pay for what you consume; no up-front cost; pay as you go (PAYG)
    Global - launch from anywhere in the world
    Secure - cloud services can by secure by default
    Reliable - data backup, disaster reconvery, and data replication, and fault tolerance
    Scalable - can increase or decrease resources and services based on demand
    Elastic - Automate scaling during spikes or drop in demand
    Current - fewer interupptions then on ground (aka if you are updating or updgrading hardware and software)
    
Types of Cloud Computing...
    SaaS Software as a Service - a product that is runned and managed by a service provider (for customers); no maintanance, it just workds and remains availible; salesforce, gmail, office 365
    Paas Platform as a service - focus on deployment and management of apps; no worries about provisioning, configuring or understanding he hardware or OS; heroku, elastic beanstalk, google app engine
    IaaS Infustructure as a Service - basic building blocks of the coud IT. Provides access to networking features, computers, and data storage space; Microsoft Azure, AWS, Oracle
    
Types of Cloud Computing Responsibilities... 
    On-Premise - 
        Customer is Responsible for everything
    Infrastructure as a service - 
        Customer is responsible - Applications, Data, Runtime, Middleware, and OS
        CSP is responsible - Virtualization, Servers, Storage, and Networking
    Platform as a Service - 
        Customer is responsible - Applications, and Data
        CSP is responsible - Runtime, Middleware, OS, Virtualization, Servers, Storage, and Networking
    Software as a Service - CSP is responsible for everything 
    
Cloud Deployment Models...
Azure's Deployment Models... 
    Public Cloud (Coud-Native) - Everything is built on the Cloud Provider
    Private Cloud (On-Primise) - Everything is built on company's datacenters; OpenStack
    Hybrid - Uses both On--Primise and Cloud Service Provider
Cross-Cloud - Using Multiple Cloud Providers; hybride-cloud (Azure Arc)

Total Ownership...
Total Cost of Ownership (TCO)...
    On-Premise - Software license fee; Implementation, Configuration, Training...Physical Security, Hardware, IT Personal, and Maintenance
    Azure - Subscription fee;  Implementation, Configuration, Training
    Azure can save around 75% money
    
Capital vs Operational Expenditure...
    Capital Expenditure (CAPEX) - Spending money upfront; Server, Storage, Networks, Backup and Archive, Disaster Recovery, Datacenter Costs, and Technical Personal; it's a guessing game
    Operational Expenditure (OPEX) - non-pysical costs with a service provider; Leasing Software and Customizing features, Training Employees in Cloud Services, Paying for Cloud Support, and Billing based on cloud metrics eg. compute and storage usage; can try products without investing in the equiptment. 
    
Cloud Architecture Terminologies...
    Availability - ensure a service remains available; High Available (HA)
    Scalability - ability to grow rapidly or unimpeded
    Elasticity - ability to shrink or grow to meet the demand
    Fault Tolerance - ability to prevent a failure 
    Disaster Recovery - ability to recover from failure; Highly Durable (DR)
    
HA (High Availability)...
    Ability for the service to remain availible by ensuring there is no single point of failure!; Running through multiple Availability Zones ensures that if 1 or 2 AZs becone unvailable, the service remains available
    Azure Load Balancer - evenly distributes traffic to multiple servers. if datacenter becomes unavailable the load balancer will rout the traffic to availble datacenters

High Scalability...
    Increase the capacity based on the increasing demand of traffic, memory and computing power
    Vertical Scaling - Upgrade to a bigger server
    Horizonal Scaling - Add more servers of the same size
    
High Elasticity...
    Automatically increase or decrease the capacity based on the current demand of traffic, memory, and computing power
    Horizonal Scaling - 
        Scaling out - adding more servers of same size
        Scaling in - removing more servers of the same size 
    Azure VM Scale Set - responds to demand or a defines schedule to increase or decrease
    SQL Server Stretch Database - stretch warm and cold transactional data from Microsoft SQL Server 2016 to Azure
    Vertical CSaling is hard for traditional architecture. 
    
Fault Tolerance...
High Durability...
    ability to recover from a disaster to present the loss of data; Disaster Recovery (DR)
    - Do you have a backup
    - How fast can you restore that backup
    - Does your backup still work
    - How do you ensure current live data is not corrupt

40:27 : https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=NKEFWyqJ5XA&t=774s
